PHEP 1: PHEP Purpose and Guidelines (#22)
heliophysicsPy/standards: pheps/phep-0001.md

PHEP: 1
Title: PHEP Purpose and Guidelines
Author: Jonathan Niehof <jtniehof@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/markdown; charset=UTF-8; variant=CommonMark
Created: 20-Oct-2023

> Post-History: 24-Oct-2023

Author: The preamble looks terrible when rendered. We could make this an indented code block, but RFC 2822 does not (as far as I can tell) allow blank space at the head of the line. We could also set it off in code fences, which again means that we're not strictly starting with the preamble.

Reviewer: Maybe this could be a table?

Author: Tables are a GH extension, not CommonMark, and would also deviate from the PEP 1 specification of this as RFC 2822. I'm not married to RFC 2822 but minimal deviation (code fence, block indent) seems wise.

Reviewer 2: I agree we should at least get it to render every line on its own line. One simple way to achieve that is to just double space it. Code fence or block indent is a fine idea too. Point is I see no reason to _strictly_ adhere to RFC 2822 (but yes minimal deviations would be nice).

Reviewer 2: Although dang, waffling just a bit, the tables in e.g. PLEPs and SEPs do look really nice...

Author: I am persuadable on GH extensions if it seems really compelling, but I'm concerned about tying ourselves too strongly to the GH ecosystem. If there are extensions used elsewhere that GH supports, that's fine.

To the preamble specifically, either code-fencing or indenting sounds good to me. Code-fencing is probably the smallest change and I'll do that in the next push. (Older versions of ReText wordwrap inside codefences but that's definitely a ReText bug). [email.parser](https://docs.python.org/3/library/email.parser.html#module-email.parser) _will_ parse the headers on PHEP-1 but will _not_ parse with either codefence or leading spaces, so I think the codefences are easiest to strip.

Author: Fun fact: codefencing the preamble does weird things to the magic number:
```
$ file phep-0001.md
phep-0001.md: Dyalog APL transfer
```

Reviewer 2: Good to know there _is_ a problem with just putting blank lines. The code fence looks nice too. Can you clarify what it does to the magic number? Not sure what you were showing us.

Author: This is what it should look like (without the code fence):
```
file phep-0001.md
phep-0001.md: ASCII text, with very long lines (837)
```
The code fence makes `file` [misidentify the file type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_number_(programming)#In_files). Is this fatal? Not really, just weird...it's called "magic" for a reason.

Reviewer 2: I'm inclined to not worry about the magic number. Modern tech can render files correctly regardless of the magic number, and it looks way better with the code fence, so I vote we use it.

Author: I'm declaring this resolved with the code fence.

Because the PHEPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal. This historical record is available by the normal git commands for retrieving older revisions, and can also be browsed on GitHub.

# PHEP Motivation
The [PyHC standards](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2529131) have not been updated since their initial approval in 2018, and indeed there is no established process for updating them. PyHC discussions often involve what packages "should" do, or "should be required" to do. For standards to be effective, they need to be seen as legitimate by those they may be imposed on.

A mechanism is needed to capture the sense of the community and allow it to progress while recognizing that the community is broad, diffuse, and diverse, and not all stakeholders are able to be present for all conversations.

# PHEP Audience
<a name="phep-audience"></a>

> The typical primary audience for PHEPs are the developers of PyHC packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The typical primary audience for PHEPs are the developer and user communities for PyHC packages.
```
I'm not sure if many users would be interested in participating in these discussions, but their thoughts, ideas, and questions would be really helpful!

Reviewer 2: User feedback is always good!

However, other parts of the PyHC community (hereafter "community") may also choose to use the process (particularly for Informational PHEPs) to document expected conventions and to manage complex design coordination problems that require collaboration across multiple projects.

This PHEP makes reference to "PyHC leadership": individuals or groups with statutory authority over the PyHC project. This may be the Principal Investigator or other individuals or groups as appropriately designated in the future, such as a steering committee.

# PHEP Types
There are three kinds of PHEP:

> 1. A **Standards** Track PHEP describes a new standard for PyHC packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A **Standards** Track PHEP describes a new or modified standard for PyHC packages.
```

# PHEP Applicability
**Standards** Track PHEPs are recommended standards for PyHC packages. Most packages should make a good-faith effort to comply. PyHC core packages are strongly recommended to comply and generally should do so, absent a compelling reason not to. A PHEP which core packages cannot agree to implement likely does not have sufficient community support for approval. Standards track PHEP compliance should be considered as a factor in evaluating current and potential PyHC packages.

**Informational** PHEPs are for the benefit of PyHC developers and users and may represent "best practices". They are not binding.

**Process** PHEPs determine the process by which the PyHC community makes formal decisions and as such bind all participants in PyHC.

> For all three kinds, key words in PHEPs must be interpreted according to [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119); the use of `must`, `must not`, `should`, and `should not` are preferred to the alternatives.

Reviewer 2: I like this. `Must/should` is better than anything with `shall`.

# PHEP Workflow

> ## PHEP Editors

Author: On the call, we had discussed the possibility of just having Shawn and Julie serve as editors. After the fact, I thought it probably makes more sense to leave project leadership in a mediation role--that keeps them out of the nuts-and-bolts and provides a place to appeal.

<a name="phep-editors"></a>
The PHEP editors are individuals responsible for managing the administrative and editorial aspects of the PHEP workflow (e.g. assigning PHEP numbers and changing their status). See [PHEP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow](#phep-editor-responsibilities-workflow) for details.

> PHEP editorship is by nomination of the current editors, subject to approval of PyHC leadership. In the event there are fewer than two active editors, PyHC leadership may appoint editors from active participants in the community, sufficient to bring the total to two.

Reviewer 2: I like this framing. It's always great for me when the community does stuff instead of me/Julie doing it, so I encourage that, but it's not always how things go, so the "out" is warranted. And two seems like a good minimum.

> The editors can be contacted by mentioning `@heliophysicsPy/pep-editors` on GitHub. All of the PHEP workflow is conducted via the GitHub PyHC standards repository issues and pull requests.

Reviewer 2: Was `@heliophysicsPy/pep-editors` supposed to be `@heliophysicsPy/phep-editors`? (Missing an 'h'?)

## Start with an idea
The PHEP process begins with a new idea for PyHC. It is highly recommended that a single PHEP contain a single key proposal or new idea; the more focused the PHEP, the more successful it tends to be. The PHEP editors reserve the right to reject PHEP proposals if they appear too unfocused or too broad. If in doubt, split your PHEP into several well-focused ones.

> Each PHEP must have a champion - someone who writes the PHEP using the style and format described below, shepherds the discussions in the appropriate forums, and attempts to build community consensus around the idea. The PHEP champion (a.k.a. Author) should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea is PHEP-able. Posting to the PyHC mailing list or Element/Slack is usually the best way to go about this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each PHEP must have a champion — someone who writes the PHEP using the style and format described below, shepherds the discussions in the appropriate forums, and attempts to build community consensus around the idea. The PHEP champion (a.k.a. Author) should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea is PHEP-able. Posting to the PyHC mailing list or Element/Slack is usually the best way to go about this.
```
Using an em dash here because I'm addicted to unicode characters.  Also, love the term "PHEP-able"!

Author: I can't take credit for PHEP-able; it's from PEP 1 (PEP-able). See Unicode discussion below :)

> Vetting an idea publicly before going as far as writing a PHEP is meant to save the potential author time. Asking the community first if an idea is original helps prevent too much time being spent on something that is guaranteed to be rejected based on prior discussions (searching the Internet does not always do the trick). It also helps to make sure the idea is applicable to the entire community and not just the author. Just because an idea sounds good to the author does not mean it will work for most people in most areas.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to suggest the creation of a GitHub issue in the repository?  That could become a place to discuss the idea in an open way, but it wouldn't need to be done this way.

Author: Issue for initial proposal, then PR with the PHEP that closes the issue? Intriguing....

Reviewer 2: I feel like PyHC telecons are the most natural place to publicly propose ideas. But GitHub Issues for initial proposals would work fine too! I like that suggestion.

Author: See wording at https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/4af2b621485d0ebb7ef4fb5aafb09544faae440a/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L61 and please "resolve" if happy

Reviewer 2: I'm happy with the wording. Only reason I'm not "resolving" right away is because I'd personally make the hyphen after "Each PHEP must have an author" an em dash instead 🤓

Author: Hey, I gave you UTF-8 is _permitted_. Now you're going to push for _required_? ;)

(Actually, I think it should probably be a colon, while we're bikeshedding.)

Reviewer 2: 😂 Agree to meet in the middle with a colon? (100% bikeshedding)

Author: I jest, but this is a fairly large document...if tweaking punctuation improves readability, it's worth finding that. It'll be a colon in the next push.

Once the champion has asked the PyHC community as to whether an idea has any chance of acceptance, a draft PHEP should be presented to the appropriate venue mentioned above. This gives the author a chance to flesh out the draft PHEP to make it properly formatted, of high quality, and to address initial concerns about the proposal.

## Submitting a PHEP

> The proposal must be submitted as a draft PHEP via a [GitHub pull request](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pulls). The draft must be written in PHEP style as described below, else it will fail review immediately (although minor errors may be corrected by the editors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal must be submitted as a draft PHEP via a [GitHub pull request](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pulls). The draft must be written in PHEP style as described below before it can be officially accepted.  The editors may correct minor errors.
```

Reviewer 2: Good change. It makes sense for something as huge as Python to insta-reject things for poor formatting, but since we're so much smaller, "before it can be officially accepted" is better language.

Although watch out for that double space you accidentally put after accepted's period @namurphy! We aren't writing on typewriters :)

The standard PHEP workflow is:

* You, the PHEP author, fork the PHEP repository, and create a file named `phep-9999.md` that contains your new PHEP. Use "9999" as your draft PHEP number.
* In the "Type:" header field, enter "Standards Track", "Informational", or "Process" as appropriate, and for the "Status:" field enter "Draft". For full details, see [PHEP Header Preamble](#phep-header-preamble).
* Update [.github/CODEOWNERS](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners) such that any co-author(s) or sponsors with write access to the standards repository are listed for your new file. This ensures any future pull requests changing the file will be assigned to them.
* Push this to a branch (not `main`) of your GitHub fork and submit a draft pull request.
* The PHEP editors review your PR for structure, formatting, and other errors. Approval criteria are:
    * It is sound and complete. The ideas must make technical sense. The editors do not consider whether they seem likely to be accepted.
    * The title accurately describes the content.

>     * The PHEP's language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.) should be correct and conformant. PHEPs with invalid Markdown (MD) markup will not be approved; here "invalid" include Markdown which provides clearly unintended output (in the discretion of the editors).

Reviewer: We could add pre-commit hooks that check spelling (i.e., codespell) as well as Markdown syntax to automate a lot of this.

Author: Yeah, I'd be up for all sorts of machinery here. I don't think the PHEP should _mandate_ it but the more automated, the better.

Reviewer 2: I could cook up all sorts of GPT-4 powered machinery for checking stuff like grammar, spelling, etc...

Reviewer 2: Something to discuss in #24

PHEP authors should incorporate community feedback by making edits and additional pushes to their branch. They must add a new `Post-History` entry added with each push. It is recommended to address as much actionable feedback as practicable with each push; however, each push may certainly contain multiple commits for ease of review. PHEP authors must not rewrite history after a push, i.e. no force-pushing. Rebasing of history before a push for greater clarity is acceptable.

PHEP authors are also responsible for managing the progress of the discussion of their PHEP, for instance by updating the PR description to highlight topics of particular interest and to provide the dates of votes on the PHEP resolution.

> If a PHEP undergoes a significant re-write or other major, substantive changes to its proposed specification, the author(s) and editor may discuss closing the existing PR and opening a new one, starting from the changed version. If this occurs, the `Discussions-To` link must be updated.

Author: I'm not tied to this...either we should require it to always stay in the same PR, or we should set some rules around that (e.g. are the initial commits squashed?) But I can see the conversation getting so tangled it's worth applying the comments and starting over.

Reviewer: This is probably situation dependent, so my inclination would be to allow for flexibility in this.

Reviewer 2: +1 to flexibility. I'd wanna see the process in action a few times before setting hard rules. Although my gut reaction is to want to keep things in the same PR (it should be simple enough to see the original PR state via commits when desired).

Author: Sounds like the wording should be left as-is? Ultimately it's up to authors and editor to make a decision; the important thing is the discussions-to link.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I'd say we can leave it as-is.

PHEP authors are responsible for collecting community feedback on a PHEP before submitting it for review. However, to avoid long-winded and open-ended discussions, strategies such as soliciting private or more narrowly-tailored feedback in the early design phase, collaborating with other community members with expertise in the PHEP's subject matter, and picking an appropriately-specialized discussion for the PHEP's topic (if applicable) should be considered. PHEP authors should use their discretion here.

PHEP discussions are subject to the [PyHC Code of Conduct](https://heliopython.org/docs/code_of_conduct/).

## PHEP Review & Resolution

> Once the authors have completed a PHEP, they may request a review for style and consistency from the PHEP editors. However, content review and acceptance of the PHEP is ultimately the responsibility of the community once the authors determine the PHEP is ready for final review and resolution. A PHEP is accepted when approved by consensus of attendees (virtual or in-person) at both a PyHC regular telecon and a regular PyHC meeting with no edits to the PHEP occurring in between. Any edits "reset the clock" and two further votes must be taken. Potential approval of a PHEP must be placed on the agenda at least a month before the meeting, including a link to the open PR with the proposed-final language of the PHEP. Persons not in attendance at the meetings may object via email or Element/Slack chat, provided that they ensure the PHEP author is notified.

Reviewer 2: Re: `at least a month before the meeting,` I agree that a month is a good timeline. I'm not sure how enforceable it'll be though; this feels like a detail that would easily get lost in the weeds (e.g. people might remember it should be on the agenda, but might forget the exactly one month part).

Author: I'm okay with "oops we need to wait another month". It does seem that the talks are scheduled pretty well a month out, and the meeting _agenda_ is set even if the _schedule_ isn't...as written I think "we will discuss this at the meeting" is sufficient and it doesn't require "we will discuss Monday at 10am", but if anybody is interpreting this differently, we should edit.

@jibarnum , thoughts?

Reviewer 2: Cool. I don't see a real need to update the language here.

"Consensus" here means no concrete objections have been raised: an accepted PHEP must be one that the entire community can at least live with. The PHEP authors must make a compelling case for the PHEP; objectors must provide meaningful concerns that could, in principle, be addressed by the authors. All are expected to discuss in good faith, while recognizing that good faith does not guarantee consensus can be reached.

For a PHEP to be accepted it must meet certain minimum criteria. It must be a clear and complete description of the proposed enhancement. The enhancement must represent a net improvement. The proposed implementation, if applicable, must be solid and must not complicate PyHC projects unduly. Finally, a proposed enhancement must be "pythonic" in order to be accepted by the community. (However, "pythonic" is an imprecise term; it may be defined as whatever is acceptable to the community. This logic is intentionally circular.)

> The editors must post oronouncements of PHEP resolution to the PyHC mailing list.

Author: I've already caught this typo and it will be fixed in a future push.

Reviewer: Or perhaps we could adopt "oronouncements" as the official declaration that a PHEP has been accepted?  😸

If a PHEP requires additional design and interface feedback before committing to long term stability, it must remain in "Draft". Alternatively, its scope can be reduced (e.g. by deferring some features to later PHEPs).

If no progress is being made on the PHEP, the editor should consult the author. The author may resume work on the PHEP, [transfer it to another author](transferring-phep-ownership), or withdraw it. If the author takes none of these actions, the editor may choose to bring the PHEP to the community for acceptance or rejection in its current form.

If a PHEP fails to find consensus, the author may choose to modify it for reconsideration in the future. The PHEP may also be "Withdrawn" if the PHEP author themself decides that the PHEP is actually a bad idea, or has accepted that a competing proposal is a better alternative. A PHEP can also be "Rejected" if it fails to find consensus and the author is not willing or able to modify it. Perhaps after all is said and done it was not a good idea. It is still important to have a record of this fact.

> When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made.

Reviewer 2: I worry about making this process any more complex. My gut reaction is to go with option 1 or 2; we're probably good, nothing needed. Although option 2, capturing names of those affirming in meeting notes, seems easy enough to do that I could advocate for it. We're already linking to the meeting minutes in the Resolution header, so as long as people are okay with putting their names on record, saying who affirmed in the minutes would be nice. I think I'm talking myself into option 2.

> When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made.

Author: Keeping the process lightweight: it seems reasonable to say nothing here as we usually capture attendees in the minutes. Or could say "link to the minutes...was made. Those present who wish to note their acceptance should be recorded in the minutes."

> When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, capturing who voted on what feels like a Julie or me task, since we're the ones who compile meeting/telecon minutes. At the risk of me forgetting we wanted to do this, I'll say it's probably not necessary to mention here in PHEP-1.

> When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made.

Author: Taking door 1 then and recording this as a rejected idea.

> When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made.

Author: Record of rejected idea [here](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/0cd4f81ca4dd6b498606aadb3bbe451bd0031b9b/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L298) and resolving.

> Final PHEPs can also be replaced by a different PHEP, rendering the original obsolete.

Author: Whatever we use for DOI minting should also support this so e.g. PHEP-130 can be marked "newer version" of PHEP-23 if it replaces it.

Reviewer 2: Good thinking.

Author: #24 for further discussion although does need some textual support as well; I'll come back to this.

Author: Text regarding DOI [here](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/0cd4f81ca4dd6b498606aadb3bbe451bd0031b9b/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L145); resolve if this is captured (outside of implementation details).

> The possible paths of the status of PHEPs are as follows:

Author: I reduced the number of states relative to PEP 1 for simplicity: deferred and provisional are removed. I also renamed "superseded" to "replaced"; the two were used interchangeably in PEP 1

![PHEP status flow diagram](phep-0001/process_flow.svg)

While not shown in the diagram, "Accepted" PHEPs may technically move to "Rejected" or "Withdrawn" even after acceptance. This will only occur if the implementation process reveals fundamental flaws in the design that were not noticed prior to acceptance of the PHEP.

> Upon reaching "Final", "Withdrawn", or "Rejected" status, the editors update the preamble and merge the PR into `main`.

Author: We also need to assign a DOI at this point. Zenodo will assign dois to a GitHub repo when a release is made, but it refers to the _entire_ repo, and we want to refer to a particular file at a particular commit hash in the repository. Open to suggestions

Reviewer: We have a (somewhat flaky) script in PlasmaPy's repo that converts PLEPs into pdfs...I think using pandoc.

Reviewer 2: @namurphy are you suggesting we could get DOIs by submitting PDF versions of PHEPS?

Author: I suggest capturing mechanics of DOI handling in #24 although I will put some text here on the need for a DOI (thus not resolving this conversation yet).

Reviewer 2: @namurphy friendly reminder to reply about these DOI PDFs; in #24 sounds like.

Author: Do we mint a DOI for Rejected and Withdrawn PHEPs or only Accepted? I'm leaning towards all.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I'd say all, to maintain a complete record.

Author: Text regarding DOI [here](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/0cd4f81ca4dd6b498606aadb3bbe451bd0031b9b/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L145); resolve if this is captured (outside of implementation details).

> Upon reaching "Final", "Withdrawn", or "Rejected" status, the editors update the preamble and merge the PR into `main`.

Author: Do we need/want to place restrictions on deleting the branch after merge? I don't know offhand what that does to the conversation...if GH keeps around the commits so that we can see what comments are tied to, this isn't a problem.

Reviewer: It would be fine to delete a branch after merging since it's possible to restore it later.  (I've accidentally deleted branches enough to really appreciate this feature!) We could also make a point to not squash PRs when merging.

Reviewer 2: +1 to deleting branches after merging.

Author: Marking this thread resolved without further edits, as I don't think we need to explicitly require one or the other (since the branch is on the submitter's fork, it's up to them).

I checked on some old SpacePy PR's and even after deleting the branch, if people commented on particular lines of the diff the diff and comments are still there.

## PHEP Maintenance
<a name="phep-maintenance"></a>
PHEPs are no longer substantially modified after they have reached the Accepted, Final, Rejected, Withdrawn, or Replaced state. Once resolution is reached, a PHEP is considered a historical document rather than a living specification and the PHEP number is a permanent identifier for the document.

If changes based on implementation experience and user feedback are made to PHEPs while in the Accepted state, they should be noted in the PHEP, such that the PHEP accurately describes the implementation at the point where it is marked Final.

Rejected and Withdrawn PHEPs must not be resurrected but may be used as the basis for a new PHEP.

> Changes to PHEPs in the Final state are limited to the preamble, and only in the event the PHEP is replaced. Final PHEPs are immutable and must be replaced by new PHEPs if necessary, rather than updated. The scope of a PHEP should be carefully considered in this light.

Reviewer: We allow amendments to PLEPs at PlasmaPy, and use versioned records on Zenodo to keep track of them.  I'd be inclined to allow PHEPs to be amended too since that would be a lot less work than submitting an entirely new PHEP.

Author: I feel pretty strongly about this; it's much more clear to say "PHEP-x" than "PHEP-x version y" and I've been bitten by rolling updates. Plus then we'd need to document the update process. Nothing wrong with submitting a new one that starts with copy-paste of the old. Open to other perspectives here.

There's also the fact that if you're bringing the whole thing back in, everything is open for discussion. I think that's a good thing--it encourages re-evaluation if we reach the point where something is important enough to revisit, and it discourages "I'm going to go through this process to fix a typo that doesn't hurt anything." It would tend to discourage very small but potentially useful changes, though.

Reviewer 2: Yeah @namurphy can you think of a concrete example or two of when a PLEP was amended? I tend to agree with @jtniehof on this one, although discouraging small but useful changes is something to consider... I could be swayed if there was a compelling PLEP amendment.

It adds a level of seriousness when you know you have to get the PHEP right on the first try though, which I like. Plus "PHEP-x" really does feel a lot clearer than "PHEP-x version y". And getting into the weeds of an update process sounds not fun. _And_ bringing the whole thing back in for discussion helps combat inertia. Idk, I'm compelled by Jon's reasoning here.

Author: Whichever way we fall on this, I'll be sure to capture explicit rationale in the PHEP (maybe in rejected ideas)

Reviewer 2: @namurphy friendly reminder we're awaiting your response here.

> Preamble changes are made via PR to the `standards` repository, merged by PHEP editors.

Reviewer 2: Should "PR" be "PRs"?

Author: Stylistic quirk. "Reply via letter..."

# What belongs in a successful PHEP?

> Each PHEP should have the following parts/sections:

Reviewer 2: Nit-picky, but rather than say "parts/sections," it'd be cleaner to call them either parts or sections, then consistently refer to them as such.

> 1. Preamble - [RFC 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) style headers containing meta-data about the PHEP, including the PHEP number, a short descriptive title (limited to a maximum of 44 characters), the names, and optionally the contact info for each author, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Preamble - [RFC 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) style headers containing metadata about the PHEP, including the PHEP number, a short descriptive title (limited to a maximum of 44 characters), the names, and optionally the contact info for each author, etc.
```

Reviewer 2: I like "metadata" better than "meta-data" too. And I'm cool with removing the arbitrary-feeling 44 character limit. Although obviously we'll have to resolve how to format the preambles before we resolve this point; _strict_ adherence to RFC 2822 doesn't feel like the way to go.

Author: This is verbatim from PEP-1, but I agree with those changes.

2. Abstract - a short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.
3. Motivation - The motivation is critical for PHEPs that want to change the PyHC ecosystem. It should clearly explain why the existing standards are inadequate to address the problem that the PHEP solves. This can include collecting documented support for the PHEP from important projects in the PyHC ecosystem. PHEP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected.

> 4. Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

Reviewer 2: Would it also make this section more readable if we bolded the 13 keywords (**Preamble**, **Abstract**, **Motivation**, etc)?

> 4. Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

Author: I'm going to stick with ~ although I like the "well it's sort of about BUT NO MORE THAN" of ≲.

Readability: I think this is probably the worst part of the whole shebang. Let's take up that discussion in [Nick's comment](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22#pullrequestreview-1695499770) since I think there's bigger pruning to be done first and then we can think of formatting improvements?

> 4. Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

Reviewer 2: Valid. "~200" is easier to read.

> 4. Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

Author: I don't think my edits improved the readability enough on their own, so I did bold those keywords (will be in next push).

> 4. Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

Author: Bolded. I think that was everything in this thread, so resolving.

    The rationale should provide evidence of consensus within the community and discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.

> 5. Specification - The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new standard. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations.
> 6. Backwards Compatibility - All PHEPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The PHEP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. PHEP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
> 7. Security Implications - If there are security concerns in relation to the PHEP, those concerns should be explicitly written out to make sure reviewers of the PHEP are aware of them.
> 8. How to Teach This - For a PHEP that adds new functionality or changes behavior, it is helpful to include a section on how to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the PHEP to their work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Specification — The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new standard. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations.
6. Backwards Compatibility — All PHEPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The PHEP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. PHEP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
7. Security Implications — If there are security concerns in relation to the PHEP, those concerns should be explicitly written out to make sure reviewers of the PHEP are aware of them.
8. How to Teach This — For a PHEP that adds new functionality or changes behavior, it is helpful to include a section on how to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the PHEP to their work.
```

> 5. Specification - The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new standard. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations.
> 6. Backwards Compatibility - All PHEPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The PHEP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. PHEP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
> 7. Security Implications - If there are security concerns in relation to the PHEP, those concerns should be explicitly written out to make sure reviewers of the PHEP are aware of them.
> 8. How to Teach This - For a PHEP that adds new functionality or changes behavior, it is helpful to include a section on how to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the PHEP to their work.
> 
>     This section may include key points and recommended documentation changes that would help users adopt a new feature or migrate their code to use a language change.
> 
> 9. Reference Implementation - The reference implementation must be completed before any PHEP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the PHEP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.
> 
>     The final implementation must include test code and documentation appropriate for the relevant PyHC project(s).
> 
> 10. Rejected Ideas - Throughout the discussion of a PHEP, various ideas will be proposed which are not accepted. Those rejected ideas should be recorded along with the reasoning as to why they were rejected. This both helps record the thought process behind the final version of the PHEP as well as preventing people from bringing up the same rejected idea again in subsequent discussions.
> 
>     In a way this section can be thought of as a breakout section of the Rationale section that is focused specifically on why certain ideas were not ultimately pursued.
> 
> 11. Open Issues - While a PHEP is in draft, ideas can come up which warrant further discussion. Those ideas should be recorded so people know that they are being thought about but do not have a concrete resolution. This helps make sure all issues required for the PHEP to be ready for consideration are complete and reduces people duplicating prior discussion.
> 12. Footnotes - A collection of footnotes cited in the PHEP, and a place to list non-inline hyperlink targets.
> 13. Copyright/license - Each new PHEP must be placed under a dual license of public domain and [CC0-1.0-Universal](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/cc0-1.0/) (see this PHEP for an example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Specification — The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new standard. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations.
6. Backwards Compatibility — All PHEPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The PHEP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. PHEP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
7. Security Implications — If there are security concerns in relation to the PHEP, those concerns should be explicitly written out to make sure reviewers of the PHEP are aware of them.
8. How to Teach This — For a PHEP that adds new functionality or changes behavior, it is helpful to include a section on how to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the PHEP to their work.

    This section may include key points and recommended documentation changes that would help users adopt a new feature or migrate their code to use a language change.

9. Reference Implementation — The reference implementation must be completed before any PHEP is given status "Final", but it need not be completed before the PHEP is accepted. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of "rough consensus and running code" is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.

    The final implementation must include test code and documentation appropriate for the relevant PyHC project(s).

10. Rejected Ideas — Throughout the discussion of a PHEP, various ideas will be proposed which are not accepted. Those rejected ideas should be recorded along with the reasoning as to why they were rejected. This both helps record the thought process behind the final version of the PHEP as well as preventing people from bringing up the same rejected idea again in subsequent discussions.

    In a way this section can be thought of as a breakout section of the Rationale section that is focused specifically on why certain ideas were not ultimately pursued.

11. Open Issues — While a PHEP is in draft, ideas can come up which warrant further discussion. Those ideas should be recorded so people know that they are being thought about but do not have a concrete resolution. This helps make sure all issues required for the PHEP to be ready for consideration are complete and reduces people duplicating prior discussion.
12. Footnotes — A collection of footnotes cited in the PHEP, and a place to list non-inline hyperlink targets.
13. Copyright/license — Each new PHEP must be placed under a dual license of public domain and [CC0-1.0-Universal](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/cc0-1.0/) (see this PHEP for an example).
```

# PHEP Formats and Templates

> PHEPs are UTF-8 encoded text files using the Markdown format. Markdown allows for rich markup that is still quite easy to read, but also results in good-looking and functional HTML. A future PHEP may include a template. PHEP Markdown must be compatible with the most recent version of the [CommonMark specification](https://spec.commonmark.org/) at the time the PHEP is approved. PHEPs must not use [GitHub extensions](https://github.github.com/gfm/).

Author: I am open to the idea of requiring a template PHEP before this one is merged (e.g. I can write PHEP-2 once the format is agreed upon here but before approving PHEP-1).

Reviewer 2: +1 to not using GitHub extensions (although if I'm being honest, I might even have to double check myself on that sometimes, since 90% of the markdown I write is GitHub READMEs).

I'm in favor of templates. People like them and it lowers barrier to entry.

Author: Okay, I will take an action to draft a template PHEP once it seems like we're converging on this.

Reviewer 2: Thank you!

Author: Template is in #25

> PHEPs should be restricted to the ASCII subset of UTF-8 where practicable. Examples of cases where it is not practicable include personal names.

Author: @namurphy let's have this arm-wrestling here :) My rationale is that you can quickly wind up down a very deep hole of hypen vs. en-dash vs. em-dash, open/close quotes vs. straight quotes, etc. etc. and enforcing consistency even within a single document can be very hard. It's somewhat counter to the ideal of markdown as something that can be whipped out in a very simple editor without doing stacks of deadkey combinations.

I can be convinced (I think).

Reviewer: I personally find em-dashes to help with readability, but I'll leave it totally up to you!  Please feel completely free to choose whichever way you prefer.

Reviewer 2: I think I'm helping @namurphy push your arm down here, @jtniehof. Haha I am also very much in favor of en-dashes and em-dashes (when someone even knows what they are, I tend to instantly like that person more 😅). 

I think we're using modern enough technology that the distinction between UTF-8 and the ASCII subset isn't something people have to think about in practice. Hell, if we did enforce this rule, I'd end up having to reference ASCII charts to make sure I'm not using illegal characters, and that feels needlessly cumbersome. 

I get that it's surprisingly challenging just to keep things like straight quotes consistent among one document, and it does make editing/proofreading more complex. But I do have extensive professional experience doing that kind of editing from a previous life. I wouldn't hate being the guy who proofreads all PHEPs for consistency in things like this.

Reviewer 2: (Plus, thinking out loud, it would take five seconds to implement an `enforce_straight_quotes(doc)` function with GPT-4, so that kind of proofreading can be automated...)

Author: Proposed solution, which will be in the next push:
-I'll remove the ASCII requirement
-Adding "The editors are responsible for enforcing PHEP format and consistency of style within a PHEP. They may use automated tools (e.g. pre-commit hooks) to assist."

There are six hundred little bits of style that really don't matter between PHEPs, and it seems to me the job of the editor to make sure things like quotes are matched. If the author of one PHEP wants to use strict ASCII, they should be allowed--if another wants to be a little more loose, they should be allowed. If somebody jams an entire PHEP full of emoji, then the editors and/or the community review process can decide if that makes sense.

Author: Oh, I should note CommonMark specifically says Unicode with no requirements on encoding.

Author: See new wording at https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/4af2b621485d0ebb7ef4fb5aafb09544faae440a/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L182

Author: Going to resolve this. Documented as a rejected idea so a new thread can be opened up there if necessary.

# PHEP Header Preamble
<a name="phep-header-preamble"></a>
Each PHEP must begin with an [RFC 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) style header preamble, marked off with a [code fence](https://spec.commonmark.org/current/#fenced-code-blocks). The headers must appear in the following order. Headers marked with "*" are optional and are described below. All other headers are required.

      ```
      PHEP: <phep number>
      Title: <phep title>
      Author: <list of authors' real names and optionally, email addrs>
      Discussions-To: <URL of current canonical discussion thread>
      Status: <Draft | Accepted | Rejected |
               Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
      Type: <Standards Track | Informational | Process>
      Content-Type: text/markdown; charset=UTF-8; variant=CommonMark
    * Requires: <phep numbers>
      Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
      Post-History: <dates, in dd-mmm-yyyy format,
                     inline-linked to PHEP discussion threads>
    * Replaces: <phep number>
    * Replaced-By: <phep number>
    * Resolution: <url>
      ```

> The Author header lists the names and optionally the email addresses of all the authors/owners of the PHEP. The format of the Author header values must be:

Author: Just realized this should also include ORCID (at least as a possibility if not required).

Reviewer 2: 100% agree, my ORCID is probably the most consistent way to look me up. Let's add at least the possibility to include it (it's possible some people still don't have ORCIDs so I wouldn't _require_ it).

Author: Further discussion can go to https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22/files#r1388544174 , where this change has been made.

> The readability of the diff should be considered when editing a PHEP.

Author: Really need input on this. As written each paragraph is one megaline. xxdiff gives something usable from this, but e.g. gitk doesn't. If we line break in the middle of the paragraph we need rules for reflow--my thought would be something like "start with 72 character lines, don't reflow when editing, and have one commit that's nothing but reflow" but that is really finicky.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that's finicky and I don't see people liking those rules too much. I personally think it's sufficient to just say "the readability of the diff should be considered when editing a PHEP." For me, having to think too hard in advance about how GitHub will render my diff would be more cumbersome than just dealing with not-super-great diffs.

Reviewer 3: I thought markdown could handle one sentence per line and that would render as one paragraph? You shouldn't need a line break.

Author: Markdown will render with word wrap just fine. The difficulty is when the markdown source isn't wrapped (as is the case for this PR, guilty as charged) the diff gets to be ridiculous because the whole "line" is a changed line if a single character changes. xxdiff and vimdiff try to render sub-line diffs with varying degrees of success, as does GitHub (see the links in the main comment), but standard `git diff` and gitk don't.

Doing one sentence per line sounds pretty reasonable--it'll reflow fine when rendered and lumps "changed" lines with actually related content. It would be a bit weird/ragged when reading the source directly but probably not too bad.

Reviewer 2: Fwiw I don't think we need to prioritize the source directly looking nice, so long as the document renders well.

Author: This is less about the source looking nice and more about being able to follow the set of changes through the diffs as the text evolves (although I know you're responding to my note).

While I have written a lot of poorly-understood sentences in my life, and this is probably not even in the top ten, it certainly doesn't seem to be _helping_. So I'm going to axe this. It's up to the author to manage the discussion; they can certainly take some of these ideas into consideration. And the editor can help if things seem to be going down a difficult-to-follow path.

Similarly, I am going to axe the notion that the markdown source is the version of record. It's persnickety and if we run into trouble of that sort, we'll have to sort it out then.

Reviewer 2: Sounds great.

("I have written a lot of poorly-understood sentences in my life"... lol)

`Random J. User <random@example.com>`

if the email address is included, and just:

`Random J. User`

if the address is not given.

> If there are multiple authors, each should be on a separate line following [RFC 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) continuation line conventions. Note that personal email addresses in PHEPs will be obscured as a defense against spam harvesters.

Author: I don't think we can reasonably do spam obfuscation and I suspect our emails are splattered all over creation anyhow, so any reason not to just remove "Note that personal email addresses in PHEPs will be obscured as a defense against spam harvesters"?

Reviewer 2: Good point. If we can't obscure them then no sense saying we will. And yes, any email I'd use is already scattered everywhere, so I don't see obfuscation as a big deal.

Author: Removed in latest, resolving.

> The Author header lists the names, and optionally the email addresses of all the authors/owners of the PHEP. The format of the Author header values must be:

Reviewer 2: Nit-picky comma use correction: `The Author header lists the names and, optionally, the email addresses of all the authors/owners of the PHEP.`

The Discussions-To header provides the URL to the current canonical discussion thread for the PHEP. For email lists, this should be a direct link to the thread in the list's archives, rather than just a mailto: or hyperlink to the list itself.

The Type header specifies the type of PHEP: Standards Track, Informational, or Process.

The optional Topic header lists the special topic, if any, the PHEP belongs under. See the Topic Index for the existing topics.

The format of a PHEP is specified with a Content-Type header. All PHEPs must use Markdown, and have a value of `text/markdown; charset=UTF-8; variant=CommonMark`.

> The Created header records the date that the PHEP was assigned a number, while Post-History is used to record the dates of pushes to the pull request for the PHEP, with the former as the linked text. Both sets of dates should be in `dd-mmm-yyyy` format, e.g. `14-Aug-2001`.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. This is the superior date formatting here.

If you are interested in assuming ownership of a PHEP, you can also do this via the pull request discussion thread. Mention both the original author and `@heliophysicsPy/phep-editors` in a comment on the pull request. (If the original author's GitHub username is unknown, use email.) If the original author doesn't respond in a timely manner, the PHEP editors will make a unilateral decision, which can be reversed.

# PHEP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow
<a name="phep-editor-responsibilities-workflow"></a>

> A PHEP editor must be added to the `@heliophysicsPy/pep-editors` group on GitHub and must watch the `standards` repository.

Reviewer 2: Again, I think you meant `@heliophysicsPy/phep-editors` here (with an 'h').

Other community members with write access to the `standards` repository may handle the tasks that would normally be taken care of by the PHEP editors. Alternately, even those with write access may request assistance from PHEP editors by mentioning `@heliophysicsPy/phep-editors` on GitHub.

> For each new PHEP that comes in an editor does the following:

Reviewer 2: I'd add a comma: `For each new PHEP that comes in, an editor does the following:`

* Skim the PHEP for obvious defects in language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.). Editors may correct problems themselves, but are not required to do so.
* If a project is portrayed as benefiting from or supporting the PHEP, make sure there is some direct indication from the project included to make the support clear. This is to avoid a PHEP accidentally portraying a project as supporting a PHEP when in fact the support is based on conjecture.

If the PHEP isn't ready, an editor will send it back to the author for revision, with specific instructions. If Markdown formatting is a problem, ask the author(s) to resubmit.

Once the PHEP is ready for discussion, a PHEP editor will:

* Assign a PHEP number (almost always just the next available number, generally avoiding special/joke numbers).
* Check that the author has correctly labeled the PHEP's type ("Standards Track", "Informational", or "Process"), and marked its status as "Draft".
* Mark the PR ready for review.

> * Inform the author of the next steps (update the PHEP with the PR link, post an announcement, etc).

Reviewer 2: `etc` here should be given a period (`etc.`) to be consistent with the other 4 `etc.`s in the document.

Updates to existing PHEPs should be submitted as comments in the GitHub pull request.

> PHEP editors don't pass judgment on PHEPs. They merely do the administrative & editorial part (which is generally a low volume task). They may participate in the community discussion of a PHEP but have no obligation to be advocates.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for clarity: `PHEP editors do not make judgments on the content or merits of PHEPs.`

Disagreements with editors must be mediated by PyHC leadership (as documented in [PHEP audience](#phep-audience)) and they may impose sanctions, including removal of the editor role.

# PHEP 1 Approval

This PHEP is subject to the same review and approval process that it proposes.

# Copyright

> This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for clarity: `This document is EITHER placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.`

Reviewer: My inclination would be to use CC BY 4.0, which adds the requirement of attribution.  Attribution can be a really helpful practice since it gives end readers information about the provenance of ideas, and where they can go to get more information.

Author: Another case where the starting point is PEP-1 verbatim.

NASA is strongly pushing CC0. They're emphasizing the distinction between the _legal requirement_ of a license and the _ethical norm_ of citation. If I can legitimately dig up the open science 101 slides I'll link them here (not sure if they're out yet).

So we could add, even in the copyright section, "In accordance with community norms, users should cite this PHEP as..." and we could include number, title, authors, DOI...whatever seems appropriate.

[CC is fairly unhelpful about PD/CC0 dual licensing](https://creativecommons.org/faq/#how-do-cc-licenses-operate) probably because [they don't think it's necessary](https://wiki.creativecommons.org/wiki/CC0_FAQ#Does_CC0_really_eliminate_all_copyright_and_related_rights.2C_everywhere.3F). I *think* if we dual-license it probably should be AND. That leaves out any argument over "which is more permissive" and it's just plain available to anyone. My memory (from quite some time back!) is that CC0 came about because in some jurisdictions it wasn't clear that it was possible to put something into the public domain [[e.g](https://opensource.stackexchange.com/questions/9871/why-is-there-no-public-domain-licensing-in-europe)]. So CC0 was an out.

Temptation here is to say "PSF's lawyers looked at this, let's use their wording unless we want other lawyers to look at it".

Reviewer 2: @jtniehof has clearly thought about this license issue deeper than I have, so I'll differ to his best judgments. I buy the reasoning.

Author: I have added citation information which hopefully nudges people towards using it (and it'll be in the template): https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/0cd4f81ca4dd6b498606aadb3bbe451bd0031b9b/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L322

```
PHEP: 1
Title: PHEP Purpose and Guidelines
Author: Jonathan Niehof <jtniehof@gmail.com> <https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6286-5809>
Discussions-To: https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/markdown; charset=UTF-8; variant=CommonMark
Created: 20-Oct-2023
Post-History: 24-Oct-2023, 31-Oct-2023, 9-Nov-2023
```

# What is a PHEP?
<a name="what-is-a-phep"></a>
PHEP stands for PyHC Enhancement Proposal. A PHEP provides information to the Python in Heliophysics Community (PyHC), describes its processes, or establishes standards for its packages.

PHEPs are the primary mechanism for proposing standards, collecting community input, and documenting the design decisions underlying PyHC standards and recommendations. The PHEP process develops and documents consensus within the community. The PHEP author is responsible for building this consensus and documenting dissenting opinions.

> Because PHEPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal. This record is available by the normal git commands for retrieving older revisions and can be browsed on GitHub.

Author: If you mean "turn 'browsed on GitHub' into a link to the standards repository", definitly...that was an oversight on my part.

For history of the draft, more involved linking might be tricky. The Discussion-To header would remain and link the PR so history can be browsed there--this does make me wonder if it's worth replacing Discussion-To with Pull-Request or something like that.

This does argue against doing a squash commit when a PHEP is Final, since we want to keep history. Maybe for discussion in #24 or maybe it belongs here, down where "editors update the preamble and merge the PR into `main`".

If you mean older revisions in the sense of the PHEP being revised after Final, if [immutability](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22#pullrequestreview-1695467345) is accepted that's handled by the `Replaces` and `Replaced-By` headers.

> Because PHEPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal. This record is available by the normal git commands for retrieving older revisions and can be browsed on GitHub.

Author: Updated to [link repo](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L19) and now there's an explicit statement to [retain history](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L147) (i.e. no squash commit).

A mechanism is needed to capture the sense of the community and allow it to progress while recognizing that the community is broad, diffuse, and diverse, and not all stakeholders are present for all conversations.

# PHEP Audience
<a name="phep-audience"></a>
The typical audience for PHEPs is the developers and user communities of PyHC packages. Other parts of the PyHC community (hereafter "community") may also use the process (particularly for Informational PHEPs) to document conventions and to manage complex design coordination problems that require collaboration across multiple projects.

This PHEP refers to "PyHC leadership": individuals or groups with statutory authority over the PyHC project. This may be the Principal Investigator or other individuals or groups appropriately designated in the future, such as a steering committee.

# PHEP Types
<a name="phep-type"></a>
There are three types of PHEP:

> 1. A **Standards** Track PHEP describes a new or modified standard for PyHC packages.

Author: Need definition and/or example of what is a standard (per @wafels)

Author: [Attempted definition/example of standards](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L37)

Reviewer 2: I like your definition/examples.

2. An **Informational** PHEP describes a design issue, or provides general guidelines or information to the community, but does not propose a standard. Informational PHEPs do not necessarily represent a community recommendation, so users and implementers are free to ignore Informational PHEPs or follow their advice.

> 3. A **Process** PHEP describes a process surrounding PyHC, or proposes a change to a process. Process PHEPs are like Standards Track PHEPs but apply to areas other than PyHC packages. They may propose an implementation; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational PHEPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures, guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process.

Author: Ooof, I'm inclined to move the reference to "implementation" here. In the context of Standards PHEP it would be "a package we assert is compliant"; in the context of Informational it would be "here is the best practice." But _process_ PHEPs are unlikely to have an "implementation" unless it's automation support for the process.

And I think all PHEPs require consensus, as written. So maybe this should be:
"~They may propose an implementation; they often require community consensus;~ Unlike Informational PHEPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them."

> 3. A **Process** PHEP describes a process surrounding PyHC, or proposes a change to a process. Process PHEPs are like Standards Track PHEPs but apply to areas other than PyHC packages. They may propose an implementation; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational PHEPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures, guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process.

Author: [New wording](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L41)

The PHEP editors will not unreasonably deny approval of a PHEP. Reasons for denying PHEP status include duplication of effort, being technically unsound, not providing proper motivation or addressing backwards compatibility, or not in keeping with the PyHC philosophy.

Standards Track PHEPs may consist of two parts, a design document and a reference implementation. It is generally recommended that at least a prototype implementation in an existing or new PyHC package be co-developed with the PHEP, as ideas that sound good in principle sometimes turn out to be impractical when implemented.

## Discussing a PHEP
<a name="discussing-a-phep"></a>
Once the draft PHEP is submitted in an open PR and a PHEP number has been assigned, the PR discussion thread provides the central place to discuss and review its contents. The PHEP must be updated so that the `Discussions-To` header links to the PR. The discussion must also be announced by the PHEP authors via reasonable means; this includes (but is not necessarily limited to) the PyHC email list and the PyHC Matrix/Slack.

> Informal conversation may elsewhere, but the discussion of record is the public thread on the pull request. Substantive input into the PHEP or questions about it belong in the PR comments and side conversations should result in comments on the PR. This ensures everyone can follow and contribute, avoids fragmenting the discussion, and makes sure input is fully considered as part of the PHEP review process. Feedback on the PR thread is a critical part of what the community will consider when reviewing the PHEP. Individual comments or the GitHub "review" process may both be used. Commenters may use the GitHub "approve" feedback to indicate they believe the PHEP is ready for a vote; however, this does not change the PHEP status to "Accepted".

Author: Caught this typo ("informal conversation may _happen_ elsewhere") and will be fixed next push.

Author: @rebeccaringuette expressed support for the "approve" feedback on the PR. It might make sense to move this information down to the review & resolution section? Or maybe just emphasize there that the community feedback up in the discussion area is the place where we really know if there is approval, and then the review / resolution is a formality. I'll see if I can't punch this up.

PHEP authors should incorporate community feedback by making edits and additional pushes to their branch. They must add a new `Post-History` entry with each push. It is recommended to address as much actionable feedback as practicable with each push; however, each push may contain multiple commits for ease of review. PHEP authors must not rewrite history after a push, i.e. no force-pushing.

PHEP authors are responsible for managing the progress of the discussion of their PHEP, for instance by updating the PR description to highlight topics of particular interest and to provide the dates of votes on the PHEP resolution.

If a PHEP undergoes a significant re-write or other major changes, the author(s) and editor may discuss closing the existing PR and opening a new one, starting from the changed version. If this occurs, the `Discussions-To` link must be updated.

PHEP discussions are subject to the [PyHC Code of Conduct](https://heliopython.org/docs/code_of_conduct/).

## PHEP Review & Resolution
<a name="phep-review-resolution"></a>

> Once the authors have completed a PHEP, they may request a review for style and consistency from the PHEP editors. However, content review and acceptance of the PHEP is the responsibility of the community. A PHEP is accepted by consensus of attendees (virtual or in-person) at both a PyHC regular telecon and a regular PyHC meeting, with no edits to the PHEP occurring in between. Any edits "reset the clock" and two further votes must be taken. Potential acceptance of a PHEP must be placed on the agenda at least a month before the meeting, including a link to the open PR with the proposed-final language of the PHEP. Persons not in attendance at the meetings may object via comment on the PR.

Author: Yes, it does.

There hasn't been much discussion around this point and I'd welcome it.

The "approve twice" thing is [stolen from the AMC](https://hb.amcboston.org/images/docs/rulesandpolicies/hb_committee_rules_v235_effective_2021-01-12.pdf) (1.16) and I think it's really nice to have as a "cooling off" strategy. I am less tied to the "real meeting" requirement, except that is where we have usually had standards-type discussions. They also have the "breathing room" for discussion...I think concerns with an PHEP are more likely to come up at a meeting than anywhere else.

If concerns can be addressed on the spot, there could potentially be another vote right there, with a subsequent telecon being the second approval. (That last is potentially vague in the current wording, so maybe 'Any edits "reset the clock" and two further votes must be taken. If a meeting or telecon has been announced to vote on a PHEP, and the PHEP is edited at the meeting, the first vote may be taken immediately after the edits.'--the idea there being to have the month's notice of the vote, but not require final wording until a vote is taken, and allow multiple votes at a meeting.)

> Once the authors have completed a PHEP, they may request a review for style and consistency from the PHEP editors. However, content review and acceptance of the PHEP is the responsibility of the community. A PHEP is accepted by consensus of attendees (virtual or in-person) at both a PyHC regular telecon and a regular PyHC meeting, with no edits to the PHEP occurring in between. Any edits "reset the clock" and two further votes must be taken. Potential acceptance of a PHEP must be placed on the agenda at least a month before the meeting, including a link to the open PR with the proposed-final language of the PHEP. Persons not in attendance at the meetings may object via comment on the PR.

Author: @wafels also raised the question if it makes sense to require the author of the PHEP to be present (physically or virtually) at the approval meeting.

> Once the authors have completed a PHEP, they may request a review for style and consistency from the PHEP editors. However, content review and acceptance of the PHEP is the responsibility of the community. A PHEP is accepted by consensus of attendees (virtual or in-person) at both a PyHC regular telecon and a regular PyHC meeting, with no edits to the PHEP occurring in between. Any edits "reset the clock" and two further votes must be taken. Potential acceptance of a PHEP must be placed on the agenda at least a month before the meeting, including a link to the open PR with the proposed-final language of the PHEP. Persons not in attendance at the meetings may object via comment on the PR.

Author: [Quorum is now listed as an open issue](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L324)

A "regular PyHC meeting" is any meeting (virtual, physical, or hybrid) organized for the purpose of discussing PyHC business, of at least a half-day duration, where a substantial portion of the community is expected to participate, and announced as such well in advance. This includes the semiannual meetings but may also include side gatherings at other meetings which are of interest to the community and designated as PyHC meetings.

"Consensus" here means no concrete objections have been raised: an accepted PHEP must be one that the entire community can at least live with. The PHEP authors must make the case for the PHEP; objectors must provide meaningful concerns that could, in principle, be addressed by the authors. All are expected to discuss in good faith, while recognizing that good faith does not guarantee consensus can be reached.

> For a PHEP to be accepted it must meet certain minimum criteria. It must be a clear and complete description of the proposed change. The change must represent a net improvement. The proposed implementation, if applicable, must be solid and must not complicate PyHC projects unduly. Finally, a proposed enhancement must be "pythonic" in order to be accepted by the community. ("Pythonic" is an imprecise term; it may be defined as whatever is acceptable to the community. This logic is intentionally circular.)

Reviewer 4: Can we clarify "solid"? Again, I realize that the same language appears in PEP 1.

I also think it would be nice to somehow tie our use of "pythonic" to the Python community's (and Steering Committee's) use of the term. It is unlikely that the PyHC notion of what is "pythonic" should significantly differ from the broader Python community's notion of what is "pythonic", but maybe we can formalize that connection a bit.

Author: I'm relucant to define "solid" as this is a very wibbly section where it's hard to have the appropriate degree of vagueness. I'm not sure if there's "case law" in how this has been interpreted for PEP-1. Maybe another adjective would be better.

Agreed the connection of "Pythonic" should be beyond PyHC, try:
("Pythonic" is an imprecise term; ~it may be defined as whatever is acceptable to the community. This logic is intentionally circular~it should be understood in the context of the broad Python ecosystem.)

Author: [New wording re:Pythonic](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L129)

When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made. The editors must post announcements of PHEP resolution to the PyHC mailing list.

Final PHEPs can also be replaced by a different PHEP, rendering the original obsolete.

The possible paths of the status of PHEPs are as follows:

![PHEP status flow diagram](phep-0001/process_flow.svg)

"Accepted" PHEPs may technically move to "Rejected" or "Withdrawn" even after acceptance. This will only occur if the implementation process reveals fundamental flaws in the design that were not noticed prior to acceptance of the PHEP.

> Upon reaching "Final", "Withdrawn", or "Rejected" status, the editors update the preamble and merge the PR into `main`. They mint a DOI. If the new PHEP replaces an existing one, the new DOI should be marked as a new version of the previous, and the Replaced PHEP must have the `Replaced-By` field in its header updated.

Author: Tag the repository (e.g. phep-1)? Make a "release"? Maybe some of that discussion can be in #24 but perhaps the tag, at least, should be required here.

Author: [Tag is now explicitly mentioned](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L147). Since releases create tags, that's a fine way to go about it, but not required.

# PHEP Formats and Templates
<a name="phep-formats-and-templates"></a>
PHEPs are UTF-8 encoded text files using the Markdown format. A future PHEP may include a template. PHEP Markdown must be compatible with the most recent version of the [CommonMark specification](https://spec.commonmark.org/) at the time the PHEP is approved. PHEPs must not use [GitHub extensions](https://github.github.com/gfm/).

The editors are responsible for enforcing PHEP format and consistency of style within a PHEP. They may use automated tools (e.g. pre-commit hooks) to assist.

# PHEP Header Preamble
<a name="phep-header-preamble"></a>
Each PHEP must begin with an [RFC 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) style header preamble, marked off with a [code fence](https://spec.commonmark.org/current/#fenced-code-blocks). The headers must appear in the following order. Headers marked with "*" are optional. All other headers are required.

      ```
      PHEP: <phep number>
      Title: <phep title>
      Author: <list of authors' real names and optionally, email addrs>
      Discussions-To: <URL of current canonical discussion thread>
      Status: <Draft | Accepted | Rejected |

>                Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>

Author: Author can include ORCiD, discussions-To is PR thread, status is Replaced not Superseded--will capture next push.

      Type: <Standards Track | Informational | Process>
      Content-Type: text/markdown; charset=UTF-8; variant=CommonMark
    * Requires: <phep numbers>
      Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
      Post-History: <dates, in dd-mmm-yyyy format,
                     inline-linked to PHEP discussion threads>
    * Replaces: <phep number>
    * Replaced-By: <phep number>
    * Resolution: <url>
      ```

The Author header lists the names and optionally the email addresses and/or [ORCIDs](https://orcid.org) of all the authors of the PHEP. The format of the Author header values must be:

> `Random J. User <random@example.com> <https://orcid.org/0000-0000-0000-0000>`

Author: I am not thrilled by this formatting. We could try the URL without the angle brackets or make it a full MD link, or just call this good enough.

Reviewer 2: Hmmm that's tricky. I don't dislike the way it is now. Just a question of which option looks best. Links could be nice too, but it might look odd if they're links while e.g. the "Discussions-To" isn't. 🤔

Author: Nothing saying `Discussions-To` and other headers can't be updated, too. e.g. NEP-0 uses rST fields for the preamble but, well, they're using rST instead of Markdown. (PEP-1 was also rST but I switched to MD because of the better support in GitHub and nobody objected at the meeting--that's open to revisiting as well, of course! Everything is!)

Reviewer 2: True, true. I do think MD was the right call over rST. And I feel like the way we have it now requires less typing than making it a full MD link. I'm tempted to leave it.

Reviewer 5: MD links are nicer looking, but in the grand scheme of things, I agree with Shawn that what was have here seems good enough. We're already requesting a lot of typing as is..

If there are multiple authors, each should be on a separate line following [RFC 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) continuation line conventions.

The Discussions-To header provides the URL to the current PR discussion thread for the PHEP.

The Type header specifies the [type](#phep-type) of PHEP: Standards Track, Informational, or Process.

The format of a PHEP is specified with a Content-Type header. All PHEPs must use Markdown, and have a value of `text/markdown; charset=UTF-8; variant=CommonMark`.

The Created header records the date that the PHEP was assigned a number, while Post-History is used to record the dates of pushes to the pull request for the PHEP. Both sets of dates should be in `dd-mmm-yyyy` format, e.g. `14-Aug-2001`.

PHEPs may have a Requires header, indicating the PHEP numbers that this PHEP depends on.

PHEPs may also have a Replaced-By header indicating that a PHEP has been rendered obsolete by a later document; the value is the number of the PHEP that replaces the current document. The newer PHEP must have a Replaces header containing the number of the PHEP that it rendered obsolete.

# Auxiliary Files
<a name="auxiliary-files"></a>

> PHEPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Such files must be placed in a subdirectory called `phep-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the PHEP number. There are no constraints on the names used in files.

Author: PEP 1 and previous drafts provide an option of having the auxiliary files in the main directory with a convoluted naming scheme. It seems simple to just have one way to do it.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, let's just have one way to do it.

* Skim the PHEP for obvious defects in language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.) or formatting. Editors may correct problems themselves, but are not required to do so.

* If a project is portrayed as benefiting from or supporting the PHEP, make sure there is some direct indication from the project included to make the support clear.

If the PHEP isn't ready, an editor will send it back to the author for revision, with specific instructions.

Once the PHEP is ready for discussion, a PHEP editor will:

* Assign a PHEP number (almost always the next available number).

* Ask the author to update the PHEP with the PR link, mark the PR ready for review, and post an announcement.

PHEP editors do not make judgments on the content or merits of PHEPs. They merely do the administrative & editorial part. They may participate in the community discussion of a PHEP but have no obligation to be advocates.

Disagreements with editors must be mediated by PyHC leadership (as documented in [PHEP audience](#phep-audience)) and they may impose sanctions, including removal of the editor role.

# PHEP 1 Acceptance
<a name="phep-1-acceptance"></a>

> This PHEP is subject to the same review and acceptance process that it proposes.

Author: @wafels raised the question of testing this process and PHEP-1 is basically its own test.

## Recording names at acceptance
<a name="recording-names-at-acceptance"></a>
There was consideration of recording the names of people present when a PHEP is accepted, or who specifically want to "sign on". This was decided to be out-of-scope for the PHEP process; the notes of the meeting should capture relevant information.

## Source formatting
<a name="source-formatting"></a>
Certain ideas regarding the format of the Markdown source were removed as more complicated than their benefit: making the source the version of record over the rendered, notes on specifics of rendering, and trying to get pretty diffs of Markdown.

# Open Issues
<a name="open-issues"></a>
## Immutability of PHEPs
<a name="immutability-of-pheps"></a>
PHEPs are proposed to be [immutable](#phep-maintenance) once Final, requiring replacement rather than modification. This is not universally accepted.

### In favor
Immutability maintains clarity of reference, "PHEP-x" rather than "PHEP-x version y", and avoids confusion arising from rolling updates. It encourages getting the PHEP correct before first acceptance. Finally, it removes the need to define and document an update process.

> A PHEP can be updated by introducing a new PHEP that starts with and builds on the original text. Everything is then open for discussion. This encourages complete re-evaluation if the community reaches the point where something is important enough to revisit, and discourages fixing a typo that doesn't hurt anything.

Author: Need to emphasize the role of the editors in keeping minor but embarrassing issues from slipping through! (That's part of the getting it right the first time process).

Author: [New wording](https://github.com/jtniehof/standards/blob/e335aacd1346f0876f5a54d9d617bf3c11ec2e32/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L283) on the editor's role here.

# PHEP Workflow
<a name="phep-workflow"></a>
 All PHEP workflow is conducted via the [GitHub PyHC standards repository](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards).

## PHEP Editors
<a name="phep-editors"></a>
PHEP editors are responsible for managing the administrative and editorial aspects of the PHEP workflow (e.g. assigning PHEP numbers and changing their status). See [PHEP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow](#phep-editor-responsibilities-workflow) for details.

PHEP editorship is by nomination of the current editors, subject to approval by PyHC leadership. In the event there are fewer than two active editors, PyHC leadership may appoint editors from active participants in the community, sufficient to bring the total to two.

The editors can be contacted by mentioning `@heliophysicsPy/phep-editors` on GitHub.

## Start with an idea
<a name="start-with-an-idea"></a>
The PHEP process begins with a new idea for PyHC. It is highly recommended that a single PHEP contain a single key proposal or new idea; the more focused the PHEP, the more successful it tends to be. If in doubt, split your PHEP into several well-focused ones.

> Each PHEP must have an author: someone who writes the PHEP using the style and format described below, shepherds the discussion, and attempts to build community consensus around the idea. The PHEP author should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea is PHEP-able. Suggested venues for this discussion include a PyHC [telecon](https://heliopython.org/meetings/), the PyHC [mailing list](https://heliopython.org/contact/), PyHC [Matrix/Slack](https://riot.im/app/#/room/#heliopython:openastronomy.org), and [an issue in the standards repository](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/issues/new/choose) (which should be linked to the PR when the PHEP is submitted). The author may choose the approach that seems best for their topic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each PHEP must have an author: someone who writes the PHEP using the style and format described below, shepherds the discussion, and attempts to build community consensus around the idea. The PHEP author should first attempt to ascertain whether the idea is PHEP-able. Suggested venues for this discussion include a PyHC [telecon](https://heliopython.org/meetings/), the PyHC [mailing list](https://heliopython.org/contact/), PyHC [Matrix/Slack](https://app.element.io/#/room/#heliopython:openastronomy.org), and [an issue in the standards repository](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/issues/new/choose) (which should be linked to the PR when the PHEP is submitted). The author may choose the approach that seems best for their topic.
```

Author: Thanks for the catch and easy fix. I was working off the contact page so I opened heliophysicsPy/heliophysicsPy.github.io#304 to fix that.

I wonder if it makes more sense to just keep this to linking the contact page instead of element directly, as I did for the mailing list. That way stuff can move around without needing to update here.

Author: Ooops, latest push is still directly linking chatroom instead of the contact page. I'll let this sit for a bit.

Reviewer 5: I like the idea of switching to the Contact page, so people can "choose their own adventure" w.r.t. which chat to use.

Author: [Just linking the contact page now](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/blob/68125caadd7c081ecc8fc9f803c6d3ebebebce58/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L71) with the idea that if we add more means of communication there, there's no need to update this.

"Consensus" here means no concrete objections have been raised: an accepted PHEP must be one that the entire community can at least live with. The PHEP authors must make the case for the PHEP; objectors must provide meaningful concerns that could, in principle, be addressed by the authors. All are expected to discuss in good faith, while recognizing that good faith does not guarantee consensus can be reached.

For a PHEP to be accepted it must meet certain minimum criteria. It must be a clear and complete description of the proposed change. The change must represent a net improvement. The proposed implementation, if applicable, must be solid and must not complicate PyHC projects unduly. Finally, a proposed enhancement must be "pythonic" in order to be accepted by the community. ("Pythonic" is an imprecise term; it should be understood in the context of the broad Python ecosystem.)

> Once a PHEP has been accepted, the reference implementation, if applicable, must be completed. When the reference implementation is complete and incorporated into a PyHC project's source code repository, the status will be changed to "Final". PHEPs which do not require a reference implementation move immediately to "Final" upon acceptance.

Author: I suggest we remove the "Accepted" state and require the reference implementation to be complete before acceptance (which will then go immediately to "Final"). So the implementation will be against a technically Draft but hopefully mature standard.

The process here feels a bit weird because there's no provision for how the move from Accepted to Final is evaluated. If it's just the completion of the reference implementation, that seems straightforward (although who agrees that the reference implementation is truly complete/relevant?) But there's also the provision that the PHEP should be updated with lessons learned during implementation--which suggests potentially substantive changes that should be reviewed / approved / voted on.

The downside I can see is somebody going to a huge effort to make a reference implementation for a standard that then gets voted down, or requires major changes to be accepted. I think this can be avoided by getting substantial input before starting that reference implementation. Then the standard and implementation can proceed hand-over-hand however seems appropriate for that PHEP. It seems like a much smaller problem for PyHC than it would for the Python language, where the implementation is probably a _lot_ more work and subject to a lot of possible time-wasting.

Reviewer 2: I agree with this suggestion. The change would simplify the process and I buy the reasoning. Substantial input before starting a reference implementation should prevent wasted effort.

# PHEP Audience
<a name="phep-audience"></a>
The typical audience for PHEPs is the developers and user communities of PyHC packages. Other parts of the PyHC community (hereafter "community") may also use the process (particularly for Informational PHEPs) to document conventions and to manage complex design coordination problems that require collaboration across multiple projects.

This PHEP refers to "PyHC leadership": individuals or groups with statutory authority over the PyHC project. This may be the Principal Investigator or other individuals or groups appropriately designated in the future, such as a steering committee.

# PHEP Types
<a name="phep-type"></a>
There are three types of PHEP:

1. A **Standards** Track PHEP describes a new or modified standard for PyHC packages. These standards are requirements that PyHC packages are expected to follow, similar to the original [PyHC standards](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2529131). Examples include testing requirements, OS support, and dependency handling.

> 2. An **Informational** PHEP describes a design issue, or provides general guidelines or information to the community, but does not propose a standard. Informational PHEPs do not necessarily represent a community recommendation, so users and implementers are free to ignore Informational PHEPs or follow their advice.

Reviewer 5: If these are not heavily suggested to be followed, do they need to go through the stringent process outlined here? My thinking is to keep all PHEP types the same, but I figured I'd raise the question.

3. A **Process** PHEP describes a process surrounding PyHC, or proposes a change to a process. Process PHEPs are like Standards Track PHEPs but apply to areas other than PyHC packages. Unlike Informational PHEPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures, guidelines, and changes to the decision-making process.

# PHEP Applicability
<a name="phep-applicability"></a>

> **Standards** Track PHEPs are recommended standards for PyHC packages. Most packages should make a good-faith effort to comply. PyHC core packages are strongly recommended to comply and generally must do so, absent a compelling reason not to. A PHEP which core packages cannot agree to implement likely does not have sufficient community support for acceptance. Standards track PHEP compliance must be considered as a factor in evaluating current and potential PyHC packages.

Author: Intentionally vague so we can change in the future without reopening PHEP 1. I was thinking of two mechanisms, which don't have to be exclusive:

1. We should formally define package review, "core" package, and compliance with standards. This is particularly relevant if there's an option of two-track compliance that is not yet defined. This could set standards like "packages of x type must comply with all Final Standards-track PHEPs within 6 months" (example only, let's not bikeshed if that's a good idea). I'd expect such definition to be in another PHEP, if that's the way we make decisions :) and it's a pretty big chunk of work that puts it out of scope of PHEP 1.
2. I see no reason a PHEP can't set its own scope, including a clause like "this takes effect for core packages six months after Final" or something. We'd have to be careful that package submitters don't need to look at the "package review" PHEP and all other Standards PHEPs to know what they need to comply with, but on the other hand the baseline would be to look at all of them anyhow. The community can discuss these issues on a case-by-case basis for any PHEP that sets its scope.

> **Standards** Track PHEPs are recommended standards for PyHC packages. Most packages should make a good-faith effort to comply. PyHC core packages are strongly recommended to comply and generally must do so, absent a compelling reason not to. A PHEP which core packages cannot agree to implement likely does not have sufficient community support for acceptance. Standards track PHEP compliance must be considered as a factor in evaluating current and potential PyHC packages.

Author: [New language to try and clarify this](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/blob/68125caadd7c081ecc8fc9f803c6d3ebebebce58/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L51)

> **Standards** Track PHEPs are recommended standards for PyHC packages. Most packages should make a good-faith effort to comply. PyHC core packages are strongly recommended to comply and generally must do so, absent a compelling reason not to. A PHEP which core packages cannot agree to implement likely does not have sufficient community support for acceptance. Standards track PHEP compliance must be considered as a factor in evaluating current and potential PyHC packages.

Author: Yes, new standards track PHEPs would imply rereview of packages. As I said above, I think it makes more sense for standards enforcement, package "types", review process to be separate from PHEP 1. We may have many processes and they don't all need to be defined in one place.

**Informational** PHEPs are for the benefit of PyHC developers and users and may represent "best practices". They are not binding.

**Process** PHEPs determine the process by which the PyHC community makes formal decisions and as such bind all participants in PyHC.

For all three types, key words in PHEPs must be interpreted according to [RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119); the use of `must`, `must not`, `should`, and `should not` are preferred.

# PHEP Workflow
<a name="phep-workflow"></a>
 All PHEP workflow is conducted via the [GitHub PyHC standards repository](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards).

## PHEP Editors
<a name="phep-editors"></a>
PHEP editors are responsible for managing the administrative and editorial aspects of the PHEP workflow (e.g. assigning PHEP numbers and changing their status). See [PHEP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow](#phep-editor-responsibilities-workflow) for details.

> PHEP editorship is by nomination of the current editors, subject to approval by PyHC leadership. In the event there are fewer than two active editors, PyHC leadership may appoint editors from active participants in the community, sufficient to bring the total to two.

Author: I was actually hoping that you and Shawn could pretty quickly appoint a couple of editors and hand off to them. That allows you to stay out of the fray and mediate if necessary (noted down around line 288). Having Shawn for this was largely to solve the bootstrapping problem. See #24 as well :)

* The PHEP editors review your PR for structure, formatting, and other errors. Approval criteria are:
    * It is sound and complete. The ideas must make technical sense. The editors do not consider whether they seem likely to be accepted.
    * It is of reasonable scope, not too broad or unfocused.
    * The title accurately describes the content.
    * The PHEP's language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.) should be correct and conformant. Markdown (MD) markup and other formatting should be clear and reasonable.

    Editors are generally quite lenient about this initial review, expecting that problems will be corrected by the reviewing process. Correctness is the responsibility of authors and reviewers, not the editors.

    If the PHEP isn't ready for approval, an editor will send it back to the author with specific instructions.

* Once approved, they will assign your PHEP a number. All PHEPs are sequentially-numbered at time of assignment. "Special" numbers (X, 0, etc.) are not used. Upon approval, the author must mark the PHEP PR ready for review.

> The PHEP editors will not unreasonably deny approval of a PHEP. Reasons for denying PHEP status include duplication of effort, being technically unsound, not providing proper motivation or addressing backwards compatibility, or not in keeping with the PyHC philosophy.

Author: Another intentionally vague thing from PEP 1. Would phrasing like "not compatible with established PyHC practice" be better? I want to leave scope for change but also give deference to established conventions.

We could also say this sort of judgment needs to be left to the community and the vote, not to the editors, and simply strike that last bit.

> The PHEP editors will not unreasonably deny approval of a PHEP. Reasons for denying PHEP status include duplication of effort, being technically unsound, not providing proper motivation or addressing backwards compatibility, or not in keeping with the PyHC philosophy.

Author: [Updated wording](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/blob/68125caadd7c081ecc8fc9f803c6d3ebebebce58/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L103)

Standards Track PHEPs may consist of two parts, a design document and a reference implementation. It is generally recommended that at least a prototype implementation in an existing or new PyHC package be co-developed with the PHEP, as ideas that sound good in principle sometimes turn out to be impractical when implemented.

## Discussing a PHEP
<a name="discussing-a-phep"></a>
Once the draft PHEP is submitted in an open PR and a PHEP number has been assigned, the PR discussion thread provides the central place to discuss and review its contents. The PHEP must be updated so that the `Discussions-To` header links to the PR. The discussion must also be announced by the PHEP authors via reasonable means; this includes (but is not necessarily limited to) the PyHC email list and the PyHC Matrix/Slack.

> Informal conversation may happen elsewhere, but the discussion of record is the public thread on the pull request. Substantive input into the PHEP or questions about it belong in the PR comments and side conversations should result in comments on the PR. This ensures everyone can follow and contribute, avoids fragmenting the discussion, and makes sure input is fully considered as part of the PHEP review process. Feedback on the PR thread is a critical part of what the community will consider when reviewing the PHEP. Individual comments or the GitHub "review" process may both be used. Commenters may use the GitHub "approve" feedback to indicate they believe the PHEP is ready for a vote; however, this does not change the PHEP status to "Final".

Author: This connects with two points that I think we've been struggling with throughout the process:
1. If the bar to clear is consensus, how much effort needs to go into collecting positive votes? Does it matter if somebody can't make the meeting to vote "yes" given that it's the objecting votes which have the most power? If we really care about capturing formal "yes" votes separate from the meeting, there's going to be more process.
2. What's the right balance between making the meeting a "privileged" place for discussion and decision, and allowing the participation of people who can't make the meeting (even virtually)? We could go with entirely online approvals and scratch a lot of the meeting, removing any quorum consideration.

Although I wanted to highlight those big issues, this wording might be resolvable without. I don't think we can use "approving reviews" as a formal vote without really making it formal--the review expires when new commits are pushed, and if we accept "expired" reviews there's the question of approval after the fact. I'd be inclined to say if we want these to be formal votes (to point 2 above), the whole process should be reworked and the PR should stay in draft status until the vote.

To better capture the spirit of the telecon, then:
'Commenters may use the GitHub "approve" feedback to indicate they support the PHEP; however, this does not make a formal vote or change the PHEP status to "Final".'

> Informal conversation may happen elsewhere, but the discussion of record is the public thread on the pull request. Substantive input into the PHEP or questions about it belong in the PR comments and side conversations should result in comments on the PR. This ensures everyone can follow and contribute, avoids fragmenting the discussion, and makes sure input is fully considered as part of the PHEP review process. Feedback on the PR thread is a critical part of what the community will consider when reviewing the PHEP. Individual comments or the GitHub "review" process may both be used. Commenters may use the GitHub "approve" feedback to indicate they believe the PHEP is ready for a vote; however, this does not change the PHEP status to "Final".

Author: [New wording](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/blob/68125caadd7c081ecc8fc9f803c6d3ebebebce58/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L111) which is basically identical to what I put in the comment above.

> Informal conversation may happen elsewhere, but the discussion of record is the public thread on the pull request. Substantive input into the PHEP or questions about it belong in the PR comments and side conversations should result in comments on the PR. This ensures everyone can follow and contribute, avoids fragmenting the discussion, and makes sure input is fully considered as part of the PHEP review process. Feedback on the PR thread is a critical part of what the community will consider when reviewing the PHEP. Individual comments or the GitHub "review" process may both be used. Commenters may use the GitHub "approve" feedback to indicate they believe the PHEP is ready for a vote; however, this does not change the PHEP status to "Final".

Reviewer 6: Can the GitHub feedback method be used by someone to disapprove when they can't make one of the meetings? If so, then what effect should that have on the formal vote? Should that person be pursued for further conversation? But then we don't want the process hung when one person disapproves on GitHub but doesn't make themselves available for discussion.

> Informal conversation may happen elsewhere, but the discussion of record is the public thread on the pull request. Substantive input into the PHEP or questions about it belong in the PR comments and side conversations should result in comments on the PR. This ensures everyone can follow and contribute, avoids fragmenting the discussion, and makes sure input is fully considered as part of the PHEP review process. Feedback on the PR thread is a critical part of what the community will consider when reviewing the PHEP. Individual comments or the GitHub "review" process may both be used. Commenters may use the GitHub "approve" feedback to indicate they believe the PHEP is ready for a vote; however, this does not change the PHEP status to "Final".

Author: As written, a comment on the PR is required to disapprove. Agreed it may get lost in the conversation. I think there should be one mechanism for formal disapproval to minimize the chance of losing it. A different option would be to equire an email to the person holding the agenda for the meeting.

Regardless of how the objection is raised, if there are edits at the meeting, those in attendance can decide if they feel the edits are sufficient to address the concerns raised by the person not there. If they do approve after edits, there will still be at least a month with no edits before the final vote.

PHEP authors are responsible for managing the progress of the discussion of their PHEP, for instance by updating the PR description to highlight topics of particular interest and to provide the dates of votes on the PHEP resolution.

If a PHEP undergoes a significant re-write or other major changes, the author(s) and editor may discuss closing the existing PR and opening a new one, starting from the changed version. If this occurs, the `Discussions-To` link must be updated.

PHEP discussions are subject to the [PyHC Code of Conduct](https://heliopython.org/docs/code_of_conduct/).

## PHEP Review & Resolution
<a name="phep-review-resolution"></a>
Once the authors have completed a PHEP, they may request a review for style and consistency from the PHEP editors. However, content review and acceptance of the PHEP is the responsibility of the community. It should be clear from the [discussion](#discussing-a-phep) when the community is beginning to agree: concerns have been addressed and new ones are not being raised, PR reviews with "approve" status are appearing, discussion is quieting down. At this point the PHEP author should seek formal acceptance.

> A PHEP is accepted by consensus of attendees (virtual or in-person) at both a PyHC regular telecon and a regular PyHC meeting, with no edits to the PHEP occurring in between. Potential acceptance of a PHEP must be placed on the agenda at least a month before the meeting, including a link to the open PR with the proposed-final language of the PHEP. Persons not in attendance at the meetings may object via comment on the PR. The PHEP may be edited up until the initial vote, for instance to incorporate discussion at the meeting. However, any edits after a vote invalidate that acceptance, and two further votes (one at a meeting, one on a telecon) must be taken.

Author: Reply [above](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22#discussion_r1419336622) goes into this. It's worth kicking around.

> A PHEP is accepted by consensus of attendees (virtual or in-person) at both a PyHC regular telecon and a regular PyHC meeting, with no edits to the PHEP occurring in between. Potential acceptance of a PHEP must be placed on the agenda at least a month before the meeting, including a link to the open PR with the proposed-final language of the PHEP. Persons not in attendance at the meetings may object via comment on the PR. The PHEP may be edited up until the initial vote, for instance to incorporate discussion at the meeting. However, any edits after a vote invalidate that acceptance, and two further votes (one at a meeting, one on a telecon) must be taken.

Reviewer 6: Can there be a specific tag people can use to express disapproval so it doesn't get lost in the conversation? Maybe as simple as a thumbs down?
I think the comment I am being tagged about isn't as important since the process is so dependent on disapprovals rather than approvals, whether on GitHub, virtual, or in-person. I do think that anyone expressing disapproval on GitHub should make themselves available for conversation before that disapproval can be used officially. Not sure on the best way forward on this, though.

# PHEP Editor Responsibilities & Workflow
<a name="phep-editor-responsibilities-workflow"></a>
A PHEP editor must be added to the `@heliophysicsPy/phep-editors` group on GitHub and must watch the `standards` repository.

For each new PHEP that comes in, an editor does the following:

* Read the PHEP to check if it is ready: sound and complete. The ideas must make technical sense, even if they don't seem likely to be accepted.

* The title should accurately describe the content.

* The PHEP's type is correctly labeled ("Standards Track", "Informational", or "Process"), and its status is "Draft".

* The file name extension is correct (i.e. `.md`).

* Skim the PHEP for obvious defects in language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.) or formatting. Editors may correct problems themselves, but are not required to do so.

* If a project is portrayed as benefiting from or supporting the PHEP, make sure there is some direct indication from the project included to make the support clear.

> If the PHEP isn't ready, an editor will send it back to the author for revision, with specific instructions.

Reviewer 5: Do we have any kind of requested timeline for revisions?

Author: Nope, I think this falls into the category of editorial discretion--there's the provision (up at line 135) for editors to poke the author about a PHEP they're not working on. We could edit that to specifically apply to this state, or assume it applies (except I probably wouldn't have the editors force it to a vote), or just figure if somebody cares enough to write a PHEP maybe they should carry through.

Editorial discretion seems to make the most sense. "Hey, you haven't touched this in three months, one more and we close the PR."

<a name="immutability-of-pheps"></a>
PHEPs are [immutable](#phep-maintenance) once Final, requiring replacement rather than modification. This maintains clarity of reference, "PHEP-x" rather than "PHEP-x version y", and avoids confusion arising from rolling updates. It encourages getting the PHEP correct before first acceptance. Finally, it removes the need to define and document an update process.

A PHEP can be updated by introducing a new PHEP that starts with and builds on the original text. Everything is then open for discussion. This encourages complete re-evaluation if the community reaches the point where something is important enough to revisit, and discourages fixing a typo that doesn't hurt anything.

On the downside, immutability discourages very small but potentially useful changes. It could make more work by requiring submission of a new PHEP.

## Quorum requirement
<a name="quorum-requirement"></a>
The [resolution process](#phep-review-resolution) does not require a quorum for a vote. Suggested quorum requirements included:

* Requiring "substantial community representation" at a vote.
* Requiring representation from at least one core package at a vote.

> * Requiring the author of the PHEP to at least be present for the vote.

Reviewer 5: I think this was mentioned in the 11/27 telecon, but I do believe the PHEP author should be present at the vote.

Author: There's nothing like marking an open issue as resolved for bringing out the discussion :) It was a suggestion that I put in open issues and there was no discussion, so I took the initiative, but happy to take further input.

My feeling is that the author has gone through the work to try and make this happen, it's probably in their own best interest to be there. People can always vote no if they think the author's absence is messing things up something terrible. But do we want to make it a hard requirement right in the process? If someone gets sick or has a family emergency and can't call in, vote gets canceled for next time?

@rebeccaringuette , I think this one was your suggestion, do you have strong feelings on it as a requirement?

Reviewer 6: I see no need to rush a process, and there is likely a great deal to be absent from the conversation if the author isn't about to make it. I would prefer it to be a requirement, but with the option that the author can designate a replacement for themselves at the meeting if desired, or ask for the vote to be postponed.

Reviewer 2: I feel like “should” is probably sufficient.

Author: Wording is [here now](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/blob/9351f28718c05a00147c54ab5dedf511f240b78b/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L132)

If a PHEP fails to find consensus, the author may choose to modify it for reconsideration. The PHEP may be "Withdrawn" if the PHEP author themself decides that the PHEP is actually a bad idea, or has accepted that a competing proposal is a better alternative. A PHEP can also "Rejected" if it fails to find consensus and the author is not willing or able to modify it. Perhaps after all is said and done it was not a good idea. It is still important to have a record of this fact.

When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made. The editors must post announcements of PHEP resolution to the PyHC mailing list.

Final PHEPs can also be replaced by a different PHEP, rendering the original obsolete.

The possible paths of the status of PHEPs are as follows:

![PHEP status flow diagram](phep-0001/process_flow.svg)

> Upon reaching "Final", "Withdrawn", or "Rejected" status, the editors update the preamble and merge the PR into `main` (maintaining the revision history). They tag the resulting commit and mint a DOI. If the new PHEP replaces an existing one, the new DOI should be marked as a new version of the previous, and the Replaced PHEP must have the `Replaced-By` field in its header updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon reaching "Final", "Withdrawn", or "Rejected" status, the editors update the preamble and merge the PR into `main` (maintaining the revision history). They tag the resulting commit and mint a DOI by uploading it to the [Python in Heliophysics Community on Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/communities/heliopython). If the new PHEP replaces an existing one, the new DOI should be marked as a new version of the previous, and the Replaced PHEP must have the `Replaced-By` field in its header updated.
```

Author: I was thinking of this as an implementation detail to be resolved through #24. It should be reasonable for the technical details to change without revisiting the baseline process (either through a new PHEP or revision, depending on how that goes).

The complete PHEP approval process is:

![PHEP workflow diagram](phep-0001/workflow.svg)

The author may withdraw the PHEP at any time, so this is not shown. Replacement of a PHEP is not shown as it results from the approval of a new, replacement PHEP using the same process.

## PHEP Maintenance
<a name="phep-maintenance"></a>
PHEPs are no longer substantially modified after they have left the Draft state. Once resolution is reached, a PHEP is considered a historical document rather than a living specification and the PHEP number is a permanent identifier for the document.

Rejected and Withdrawn PHEPs must not be resurrected but may be used as the basis for a new PHEP.

> Changes to PHEPs in the Final state are limited to the preamble, and only in the event the PHEP is replaced. Final PHEPs are immutable and must be replaced by new PHEPs if necessary, rather than updated. The scope of a PHEP should be carefully considered in this light. Preamble changes are made via PR to the `standards` repository, merged by PHEP editors.

Reviewer: A consequence of PHEPs being immutable is that making a minor change to a PHEP would require creating an entirely new PHEP. I'm hesitant about this since this could effectively end up being a change preventer. 

For example, there might be a time where we decide we want to change the process for approving a PHEP. If the change is fairly minor or incremental, it probably wouldn't feel worth the effort to create an entirely new PHEP and go through this process once again. If we were to create an entirely new PHEP for a minor change, we would also have a harder time looking at the version control history of the PHEP(s) which would make it more difficult to figure out what the changes actually were.

I'm wondering if there is a way that we could preserve immutability while making it easier to amend PHEPs. **What would we think of having PHEPs be versioned?**  That way, if we want to change the decision-making process, we could preserve the PHEP number and have separate DOIs for versions 1 & 2. The version number could be kept in the metadata for the PHEP. The mechanics for doing this are already in place on Zenodo, where authors can upload new versions of records.

(We also have a [section on amending PLEPs in PLEP 1](https://github.com/PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy-PLEPs/blob/main/PLEP-0001.rst#amending-or-superseding-a-plep) for PlasmaPy.)

Author: I think we're going to need more people to chime in on this one.

Reviewer 6: I like the versioning idea Nick brings up here, but I hesitate about leaving such changes up to a committee. In some cases, changing one word in a PHEP can have large consequences. I also like the idea of recommending discussion with the original author of the PHEP being amended (if possible). How about allowing PHEPs to be amended, including the approval discussion/process on GitHub, but only requiring one vote once consensus is reached?

Reviewer 2: We were discussing this earlier in another comment thread but it died down. @namurphy, I'd actually asked if you could provide an example or two of a time where you amended a PLEP and were happy you could do so, and it'd still be helpful for me to hear such an example. Because I (and I think Jon too) lean against the idea of versioning PHEPs, and hence having to refer to each one as **PHEP X version Y**. It just seems simpler to me to make them immutable. Although I recognize that means exercising effort to make sure you get a PHEP exactly right the first try.

Reviewer: Sure!  One example for us is [PLEP 7](https://github.com/PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy-PLEPs/blob/main/PLEP-0007.rst) which lays out the structure of top-level subpackages in PlasmaPy. When we want to add a new subpackage, we go through the process of amending the PLEP. This has the effect that PLEP 7 is essentially a living document.  

In practice, I don't think I've ever had the need to refer to something as PLEP X version Y since we can usually implicitly refer to the most recent version. If we end up having to cite it, we can use the version number along with the DOI for that exact version. 

Overall, it's worth thinking about the tradeoffs between having PHEPs be immutable vs. versioned. Immutability will make PHEPs more stable and reduce possible ambiguity, while allowing PHEPs to be amended will allow for more flexibility and making it a lot easier to make minor changes.

Author: @namurphy , thanks for engaging with this...it's a tricky thing to try to resolve asynchronously and I appreciate the work. I've dug up the [previous conversation](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/pull/22#pullrequestreview-1695467345) so people can look at that. Every point you bring up is really making me think, even if I'm not changing my mind :)

I've got a few more thoughts, but I'm also wondering, would it make sense for me to try and summarize the differences between the approaches in a table or something? I'm thinking of clarifying our own thinking, but also making it easy for people who haven't engaged in this discussion to understand the trade-off and weigh in.

Reviewer 2: I personally want to discourage having any PHEP being a “living document.” I do want more finality than that. But I buy the argument that, in practice, one can assume you implicitly mean the latest version of a PHEP—so we wouldn’t _always_ have to refer to them like PHEP x version y. Which _is_ a tick in the “pros” column.

This immutibility question is in my mind the last major issue to solve before we can call PHEP-1 done. 

I still find myself leaning towards keeping them immutable, but I gotta admit I don’t have strong reasons for why. Thinking out loud, but: would it be ridiculous to say PHEPS are immutable, but then if in the future we come across a use case where we really wanna edit a PHEP, I could introduce a new PHEP-9999 titled “JK, PHEPs can be edited”? 🤷‍♂️ Decisions are hard.

Author: Here's my attempt to summarize the differences in approach. @namurphy, please check to make sure I'm being fair to your proposal, happy to edit.

## Summary table for treating Final PHEPs as immutable vs. mutable.

For all TBD's, [PlasmaPy can be considered as an example](https://github.com/PlasmaPy/PlasmaPy-PLEPs/blob/main/PLEP-0001.rst#amending-or-superseding-a-plep).

||Immutable PHEPs|Mutable PHEPs|
|-|-|-|
| Process for amending | Copy existing PHEP, assign new number, include `Replaces` header, make edits, introduce as a new PHEP | TBD |
| Process for replacing | Copy existing PHEP, assign new number, include `Replaces` header, make edits, introduce as a new PHEP | Same (amendments may be sufficient, for many cases, but ability to replace is probably still needed for very large changes) |
| Approvals needed for changes | Same process as for any PHEP, two-round vote. | TBD, ideally "lighter", potentially single-round vote. |
| Distinguishing between "amendment" and "replacement" | N/A, any change requires a replacement | TBD, need to determine criteria for the decision and who makes it (e.g. original author, amendment author, PHEP editors, full vote |
| Determining latest version | Latest version will not have a `Replaced-By` header; otherwise use that header as reference to new version. DOI record of replaced PHEP should be updated to indicate DOI of replacement PHEP as well. | Latest version is that which is "live" on the PHEP site; new versions will also get a new DOI and similarly have updated records. Assume unqualified references to PHEP are to latest version unless specified. Also check `Replaced-by` header to see if fully replaced (instead of amended).|
| Checking against earlier version to see if something "used to be compliant" | Check the `Replaces` header to find PHEP number of earlier PHEPs, read on main site. Look at DOI record which should indicate "newer version of..." | Look at version number and find earlier version (potentially in git history if not on main site). Look at DOI record which should indicate "newer version of...". Also check `Replaces` header to see if fully replaced (instead of amended).|
| Deciding we made the wrong decision and going to the other approach | Introduce a new PHEP that replaces PHEP-1 and includes an amendment process. Difficult to retroactively declare certain PHEPs as "really amendments" and renumber, add version numbers, but maybe possible. | Introduce amendment or replacement to PHEP-1 that removes the amendment process. Include how previously-amended PHEPs will be handled (e.g. by retroactively assigning new PHEP numbers, or keeping the version numbers for those PHEPs but not future changes). |
| Implicit strategy | PHEPs should be general and flexible, allowing some change in implementation details as long as they remain compliant. Allows for flexibility "outside of the process". | PHEPs can be more specific and include more implementation details, as easier to amend. More flexibility "within the process", discourages flexibility "outside of the process" (i.e. more likely to include details that may change) |

Author: Here's where I abandon attempts at neutrality and fight my corner :)

- Easy amendment, move-fast seems more appropriate to me in the case of a tightly-coupled team, where people are generally aware of what potential changes are "in the air". It is also more appropriate where decision-making resides in relatively few people (e.g. a steering committee). In the case of PyHC, there are a lot of people, PyHC is usually not our first priority, and (as currently written in PHEP-1), decision-making is spread across pretty much everybody. Those aspects of PyHC might change, of course, but I suspect it will always be more spread than, say, PlasmaPy.
- I have been thinking of standards as what to do and why, not so much how. The fast-changing details can live in the reference implementation, which is not subject to approvals after the fact. That does lead to a little bit of ambiguity but I'm not sure every time some detail changes there needs to be approval--it just needs to be clear who's responsible for keeping things going, and within what limits. Even in this case I set up #24 separate from the idea of the process.
- Immutable PHEPs means changes have to go through a full process, which is in some sense more complicated. But it also means we have _only one process for approvals_, which is in some sense _less_ complicated. We wouldn't need to define amendment vs. replacement, what is different about the amendment process, etc. A "heavier" process, but one that meets multiple needs without having to introduce additional processes.
- I'm wary of a "streamlined" approval process that might allow for "back door" wholesale rewriting, sort of the [SPAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special-purpose_acquisition_company) of standards. A lot of pathologies that have come up in our discussion are addressed by the two-step vote. Re-examining that discussion in light of a lightweight amendment process is a challenge--which may still be worth the effort!
- To @sapols' point, I think it's probably easier to go from "immutable" to "mutable" than the other way around, although either direction will leave a bit of annoying cruft around.

I want to solicit more voices here. @rebeccaringuette you've chimed in, further thoughts based on my table above and the additional conversation?

Our other package reps (@aburrell @nabobalis @rweigel @jameswilburlewis), what are your thoughts on this discussion?

Author: An example of the immutable approach is RFCs, e.g. [RFC5322](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5322) and [RFC2549](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2549). I don't know the full RFC process, but it's interesting to see that those aren't even updated to show the new one (you can walk backwards in history, but not forward), which is _not_ what I propose here.

PEP1, incidentally, takes the mutable approach (without explicit version numbering).

3. **Motivation** - The motivation must clearly explain why the existing standards are inadequate to address the problem that the PHEP solves. This can include collecting documented support for the PHEP from important projects in the PyHC ecosystem. PHEP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected.

4. **Rationale** - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work.

    The rationale should provide evidence of consensus within the community and discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.

5. **Specification** - The technical specification should completely describe the proposed standard. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations, where applicable.

6. **Backwards Compatibility** - All PHEPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must describe these incompatibilities and their severity. The PHEP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities.

7. **Security Implications** - Any security concerns should be explicitly written out.

> 8. **How to Teach This** - This section may include key points and recommended documentation changes that would help users, new and experienced, apply the PHEP to their work.

Reviewer 2: Great call. I'd say let's put it here; it fits well and doesn't need its own section.

> 8. **How to Teach This** - This section may include key points and recommended documentation changes that would help users, new and experienced, apply the PHEP to their work.

Author: [Here](https://github.com/heliophysicsPy/standards/blob/9351f28718c05a00147c54ab5dedf511f240b78b/pheps/phep-0001.md?plain=1#L213)

Once a PHEP has been accepted, its status will be changed to "Final".

If no progress is being made on the PHEP, the editor should consult the author. The author may resume work on the PHEP, [transfer it to another author](transferring-phep-ownership), or withdraw it. If the author takes none of these actions, the editor may choose to bring the PHEP to the community for acceptance or rejection in its current form.

If a PHEP fails to find consensus, the author may choose to modify it for reconsideration. The PHEP may be "Withdrawn" if the PHEP author themself decides that the PHEP is actually a bad idea, or has accepted that a competing proposal is a better alternative. A PHEP can also "Rejected" if it fails to find consensus and the author is not willing or able to modify it. Perhaps after all is said and done it was not a good idea. It is still important to have a record of this fact.

> When a PHEP changes state, the PHEP preamble must be updated accordingly. In addition to updating the Status field, the Resolution header must be added with a direct link to the minutes of the telecons and meetings where a decision on the PHEP was made. The Revision section must be updated with the data of acceptance, as appropriate. The editors must post announcements of PHEP resolution to the PyHC mailing list.

Reviewer 2: Found a typo: "**data** of acceptance, as appropriate"  --> "**date** of acceptance"

Author: New split keyboard, very good for neck and shoulder pain, not so good for accuracy right now. Thanks for the catch.
